---
layout: article
title: "Flow models are dynamical systems"
date: 2019-03-22 08:00:00 +0100
description: We present flow models from the viewpoint of dynamical measure preserving systems and
    see how this formulation can help us make better models.
categories: ["dynamical systems", "generative models"]
image: https://images.unsplash.com/photo-1484589065579-248aad0d8b13?ixlib=rb-1.2.1&ixid=eyJhcHBfaWQiOjEyMDd9&auto=format&fit=crop&w=900&h=550&q=80
---

A measure-preserving dynamical system is characterised by a probability space $(X, \mathcal{B}, \mu)$ along with a transformation $T: X \to X$ that is measure-preserving; meaning that $T$ itself is measurable and if we take a subset of the $\sigma$-algebra $B \subset \mathcal{B}$, then $\mu(T^{-1}(B)) = \mu(B)$.

## Flow models

Now let us become a bit more concrete by considering the specific probability space $(\mathbb{R}^n, \mathcal{B}(\mathbb{R}^n), \mu)$,
where $\mathcal{B}(\mathbb{R}^n)$ is the Borel $\sigma$-algebra on the space and $\mu$ the Lebesgue measure.


All of this might seem a bit abstract, especially the measure-preserving property if you are not familiar with push-forward measures. So let us instead provide an analogy. A classical interpretation of such a system is to view the operator $T$ is a stirring operation on an incompressible fluid. You can try out such an operation in the figure below.

{% include fluid.html %}

Hopefully playing around with this should give you an intuition for what we mean when talk about incompressability.

## Optimal flows

Borrowing from the litterature of optimal transport, we can define a transport plan between two probability distributions. In optimal transport we are interested in finding a *transportation plan* $T: X \to Y$ that moves every single point in $X$ to $Y$ in an optimal way. We often consider optimality in this context to mean with the least amount of work. To understand this notion, let us consider the Monge problem of finding the optimal transport plan between two measure spaces $(X, \mathcal{A}, \mu)$ and $(Y, \mathcal{B}, \nu)$.

$$\inf \left \{ \int_{X} c(x, T(x)) d\mu(x) \big | T_{\#}(\mu) = \nu \right \}$$

We want to find the map $T: X \to Y$ that minimises the cost function $c$ over the whole $X$ space while requiring that the push-forward measure of $\mu$ through $T$ is equivalent to $\nu$.

$$W_2^2(\mu, \nu) = \inf_{\gamma \in \Gamma(\mu, \nu)} \int_{X \times Y} ||x - y||_2^2 d\gamma(x, y) $$

### Mathematics of flows

What does it mean mathematically for a fluid to be incompressible? If we look at the transformation from a space to itself, $T: X \to X$, then for a well-behaved fluid, the derivative $D(T)$ exists at every point in the space $X$. This map can be seen as the best (local) linear approximation of the behaviour of $T$ around $x$ and when the space is finite dimensional, this is exactly the Jacobian matrix.

$$D(T) = \left [ \frac{\partial T\mathbf{x}}{\partial \mathbf{x}_1}, \dots, \frac{\partial T\mathbf{x}}{\partial \mathbf{x}_n} \right ] = J$$

The Jacobian is the natural way to express the change induced by the transformation, therefore if we are interested in the volumetric change induced by $T$, we should look at the size of the Jacobian, $d = \| \det (J) \|$. The Jacobian determinant informs us of the fluid behaviour, if $d>1$ the fluid expands and at $d<1$ it contracts.

An additionally interesting property of flows is that they behave smoothly with respect to time

### Flow models again

Let us consider a concrete example. Denote $T_{0}(\mathbf{x}) = \mathbf{x}$ as the flow at time zero, or the initial distribution and $y = T_{N}(\mathbf{x})$ as the final (target) distribution.

------

### References {#references}

### Footnotes {#footnotes}
